API Performance Testing
=========================
API stands for Application Programming Interface

API  is a set of rules, protocols, and tools that allows different software applications to communicate to each other. The API acts as a bridge, ensuring smooth interaction between the client and the server.
APIs can be local, remote, or a combination of both.  They are not necessarily web-based and can function within the same system or across different systems.

API Key
-------
An API key is a unique string of characters,that serves as a form of authentication and authorization for accessing specific functionalities or resources within an API.

API Types
---------
- Public APIs
  - Public APIs are also called as Open APIs and they are available all the external developers
- Private APIs
  - Private IPs are also called as Internal APIs and are designed for Internal use within the company
- Partners APIs
  - Partner APIs, are interfaces specifically designed to facilitate communication and collaboration between different organizations, typically business partners or third-party entities
- Composite APIs
  - Instead of interacting with individual APIs separately, developers can use a Composite API to perform a sequence of operations or obtain data from multiple sources with a single API call. 


API architectural styles
------------------------
- SOAP 
  SOAP stands for Simple Object Access Protocol. It is a communication protocol.
  It provides a standardized way for different software applications to communicate.
  The preferred message format is XML (Extensible Markup Language)
  Message Elements:
   - <Envelope> 
       - <Headers>
       - <Body>
          <Fault>
  
WSDL stands for Web Services Description . It serves as a comprehensive description that helps both service providers and consumers understand how to interact with a web service.
UDDI stands for Universal Description, Discovery, and Integration. It acts as a centralized registry where service providers can publish information about their web services.

REST
----
REST stands for Representational State Transfer. It allows different software applications to communicate with each other over the internet.
In REST API everything is considered as resource. Each resource uniquely identified by a URI (Uniform Resource Identifier).
Ex: https://example/api/v1/products


The request has very specific format like POST /customers HTTP/1.1. This URI preceeds with HTTP verb which tells to the server what we want to do with the resource

HTTP methods / verbs:

POST  -  CREATE a new resource
GET  - READ an existing resource
PUT - UPDATE an existing resource
DELETE - DELTE an existing resource

The two most common formats for REST API payloads are JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) and XML (eXtensible Markup Language).
HTTP Status codes:
100-199 - Infromational responses
200-299 - Successful responses
300-399 - Redirection messages
400-499 - Client error messages
500-599 - Server error messages

GraphQL
-------
GraphQL is a query language for APIs that was developed by Facebook.
It allows clients to request only the data they need, minimizing over-fetching or under-fetching the data.
GraphQL has typically a single endpoint. Clients can request data from this endpoint using queries, and the server responds with the requested data.
GraphQL supports Mutations and Subscriptions. Mutations are used for modifying the data and subscriptions are for real-time updates.


gRPC
----

gRPC is an open-source, high-performance RPC (Remote Procedure Call) framework initially developed by Google.
A local procedural call is nothing but calling a proecedure or function within the same program or application. 
Remote Procedure call is calling a procedure or function on a remote system
The core of gRPC is Protocol BUffers which simplify the way different parts of an application communicate by providing a structured and efficient method for defining and exchanging data
gRPC uses HTTP/2 as its underlying transport Protocol which provides a more efficient communication layer for remote procedure calls. 


Web Socket
----------
WebSocket is a communication protocol that enables real-time, bidirectional communication between a client (like a web browser) and a server over a single, long-lived connection.

Web Hook
--------
A webhook is a way for one system to provide real-time information to another system. It allows automated notifications or data updates to be sent from one application (the sender) to another (the receiver) whenever a specific event occurs. 


Web Service vs APIs
-------------------
APIs are set of rules and tools that allows different software applications to communicate with each other while web services specifically refer to APIs that operate over the web.
APIs can be local or remote, and they may not necessarily operate over the web. 
In a nutshell, all web services are APIs, but not all APIs are web services.

API Performance Tesitng Requirements
-------------------------------------

Type of APIs (Internal / External)
End points and Methods
Authentication Details
Sample Request & Response Formats
Input Parameters / Test Data
Rate Limiting / Thorttling
Workloads / SLAs

In JMeter, we can use HTTP Request Sampler and HTTP Header Manager to create SOAP / REST API scripts.

Client Certficates:
-------------------
JMeter supports JKS (Java Key Store) Certificates.
They can imported in 2 ways.
From JMeter UI -> Options -> SSL Manager
For Non GUI Mode, go to JMeter bin directory and look for system.properties and then uncomment the following parameters and fill the details.

javax.net.ssl.keyStore=/path/to/jks/file
javax.net.ssl.keyStorePassword=yourJKSpassword


